#summary One-sentence summary of this page.
#labels Phase-Requirements

= Introduction =

IEEE Micromouse Competition Rules
http://www.ieee.uc.edu/main/files/sac2007/mm_rules.pdf


= Details =

*A. Objective*

In this contest the contestant or team of contestants design and build an
autonomous robotic "mouse" that negotiates a maze of standard dimensions
from a specified corner to its center in the shortest time.

*B. Contest Eligibility*

1. All contestants must be an undergraduate IEEE student member at a
Region 2 school from within the Area of Region 2 in which contest they
will compete at the time of entry in the Micromouse contest. Any student
who graduates anytime during the Fall-Spring academic year in which the
contest is held is eligible to enter the contest. A student graduating after
competing in the contest still remains eligible to compete in succeeding
Area, Region, and higher contests as an undergraduate student. Up to two
graduate students per team are also allowed as stated in Rule B.5 below,
providing they meet all other requirements.

2. All contestants must be an IEEE Student Member or must have submitted
an application for membership (and have it accepted by their Student
Branch Counselor) prior to entry in the Student Branch and/or Chapter
Contest.

3. The contestant(s) will make a brief presentation of their mouse design
prior to the competition (5 minutes max) if time allows.

4. The Micromouse entry may be the effort of an individual or a team. In the
case of a team it should be possible to demonstrate that each individual
made a significant contribution and that they are all IEEE members.

5. A team may consist of up to five people. A team of four or five people
may include no more than two graduate students. A team of two or three
people may have no more than one graduate student. A team consisting of
a single graduate student is not allowed.

6. All entrants to the contest must declare their intention to enter the contest
at least 4 weeks before the date of the regional contest. This notice must
be submitted to the current Student Activities Coordinator, appropriate
Area, Region 2, by mail, email, or phone (see the names and addresses at
the end of this document).

7. If the total number of declared mice, from all schools, is less than the
number of eligible schools to compete in that Area, all shall be eligible to
IEEE Region 2 Student Activities Conference 2007 - Micromouse Rules 2
compete in the area contest. Two or more mice of near identical design
from the same school are not allowed. If more mice than the number of
eligible schools to compete are entered in the contest (ie., four mice from
the same school), a qualifying competition will be held in the morning. A
qualifying contest might involve, for example, having the mice transverse
a specific numbers of cells.

*C. Rules for the Micromouse*

1. A Micromouse shall be self-contained (no remote controls). A
Micromouse shall not use an energy source employing a combustion
process.

2. A Micromouse shall not leave any part of its body behind while
negotiating the maze.

3. A Micromouse shall not jump over, fly over, climb, scratch, cut, burn,
mark, damage, or destroy the walls of the maze.

4. A Micromouse shall not be larger either in length or in width, than 25
centimeters. The dimensions of a Micromouse that changes its geometry
during a run shall not be greater than 25 cm x 25 cm. There are no
restrictions on the height of a Micromouse.

5. Any violation of these rules will constitute immediate disqualification
from the contest and ineligibility for the associated prizes.

*D. Rules for the Maze*

1. The maze is composed of multiples of an 18 cm x 18 cm unit square. The
maze comprises 16 x 16 unit squares. The walls of the maze are 5 cm high
and 1.2 cm thick (assume 5% tolerance for mazes). The outside wall
encloses the entire maze.

2. The sides of the maze walls are white, the tops of the walls are red, and the
floor is black. The maze is made of wood, finished with non-gloss paint.

a. WARNING: Do not assume the walls are consistently white, or
that the tops of the walls are consistently red, or that the floor is
consistently black. Fading may occur; parts from different mazes
may be used. Do not assume the floor provides a given amount of
friction. It is simply painted plywood and may be quite slick. The
maze floor may be constructed using multiple sheets of plywood.
Therefore there may be a seam between the two sheets on which
any low-hanging parts of a mouse may snag.

3. The start of the maze is located at one of the four corners. The start square
is bounded on three sides by walls. The start line is located between the
first and second squares. That is, as the mouse exits the corner square, the
time starts. The destination goal is the four cells at the center of the maze.
At the center of this zone is a post, 20 cm high and each side 2.5 cm. (This
IEEE Region 2 Student Activities Conference 2007 - Micromouse Rules 3
post may be removed if requested.) The destination square has only one
entrance.

4. Small square zones (posts), each 1.2 cm x 1.2 cm, at the four corners of
each unit square are called lattice points. The maze is so constituted that
there is at least one wall at each lattice point.

5. Multiple paths to the destination square are allowed and are to be
expected. The destination square will be positioned so that a wall-hugging
mouse will NOT be able to find it.

*E. Rules for the Contest*

1. Each contesting Micromouse is allocated a total of 10 minutes of access to
the maze from the moment the contest administrator acknowledges the
contestant(s) and grants access to the maze. Any time used to adjust a
mouse between runs is included in the 10 minutes. Each run (from the start
cell to the center zone) in which a mouse successfully reaches the
destination square is given a run time. The minimum run time shall be the
mouse’s official time. First prize goes to the mouse with the shortest
official time. Second prize to the next shortest, and so on. NOTE, again,
that the 10-minute timer continues even between runs. Mice that do not
enter the center square will be ranked by the maximum number of cells
they consecutively transverse without being touched. All mice who enter
the center square within their 10 minute allotment are ranked higher than
those who do not enter the center square.

2. Each run shall be made from the starting square. The operator may abort a
run at any time. If an operator touches the Micromouse during a run, it is
deemed aborted, and the mouse must be removed from the maze. If a
mouse has already crossed the finish line, it may be removed at any time
without affecting the run time of that run. If a mouse is placed back in the
maze for another run, a one-time penalty of 30 seconds will be added to
the mouse’s next run time.

3. After the maze is disclosed, the operator shall not feed information on the
maze into the Micromouse however, switch positions may be changed.

4. The illumination, temperature, and humidity of the room shall be those of
an ambient environment. (40 to 120 degrees F, 0% to 95% humidity, noncondensing).

a. BEWARE: Do not make any assumptions about the amount of
sunlight, incandescent light, or fluorescent light that may be
present at the contest site.

5. The run timer will start when front edge of the mouse crosses the start line
and stops when the front edge of the mouse crosses the finish line. The
start line is at the boundary between the starting unit square and the next
unit square clockwise. The finish line is at the entrance to the destination
square.

6. Every time the mouse leaves the start square, a new run begins. If the
mouse has not entered the destination square, the previous run is aborted.
For example, if a mouse re-enters the start square (before entering the
destination square) on a run, that run is aborted, and a new run will be
deemed begun, with a new time that starts when the starting square is
exited.

7. The mouse may, after reaching the destination square, continue to navigate
the maze, for as long as their total maze time allows.

8. If a mouse continues to navigate the maze after reaching the destination
square, the time taken will not count toward any run. Of course, the 10-
minute timer continues to run. When the mouse next leaves the start
square, a new run will start. Thus, a mouse may and should make several
runs without being touched by the operator. It should make its own way
back to the beginning to do so.

9. The judges reserve the right to ask the operator for an explanation of the
Micromouse. The judges also reserve the right to stop a run, declare
disqualification, or give instructions as appropriate (e.g., if the structure of
the maze is jeopardized by continuing operation of the mouse).

10. A contestant may not feed information on the maze to the Micromouse.
Therefore, changing ROMs or downloading programs is NOT allowed
once the maze is revealed. However, contestants are allowed to:

a. Change switch settings (e.g. to select algorithms)
b. Replace batteries between runs
c. Adjust sensors
d. Change speed settings
e. Make repairs

11. However, a contestant may not alter a mouse in a manner that alters its
weight (e.g. removal of a bulky sensor array or switching to lighter
batteries to get better speed after mapping the maze is not allowed). The
judges shall arbitrate.

12. There is only one official IEEE Micromouse contest each year in each
Area or Region. All mice, whether or not they have competed in previous
contests, compete on an equal basis. All mice must be presented to the
judges by the original design team, which must meet all other
qualifications. First prize will go to that mouse which travels from the start
square to the destination square in the least amount of time. Second and
third prizes will be awarded to the second and third fastest respectively.
As stated in Rule E.1, mice that do not enter the center square will be
ranked by the maximum number of cells they consecutively transverse
without being touched.

13. A rotating trophy is awarded to the first place mouse. Verbal recognition
and certificates will be given to the top three mice among those who are
competing for the first time. If you and your mouse are first-time
contestants, be sure to so stipulate when you register for the contest and
notify the contest judge at the time of the contest.

14. If requested, a break will be provided for a mouse after any run if another
mouse is waiting to compete. The 10-minute timer will stop. When the
mouse is re-entered, the 10-minute timer will continue. The judges shall
arbitrate on the granting of such breaks.